# Profiling
## Motivation
A profile of the current papayachat **multi-process** implementation will be measured under different loads and compared with an HTTP server written in Go. The motivation behind this is to see what performance difference there is between a **multi-process** server implementation (papayachat) and a server running with a _non-preemptive_ scheduler, i.e. **coroutines** (Go HTTP server).

### Hypothesis/Open questions
* **How costly is the overhead of kernel-space context switches?** One would assume that the overhead of a multiprocess network application, that has to handle constant context switches through the kernel, would be significantly bigger than in a Go network application, since the Go scheduler tries to handle as many operations as possible in user-space. The difference should be seen in the CPU load of both applications, depending on how much load is applied to the application.
* Parallelization: Can one see a difference in the overall CPU load with an increase of the CPU cores while comparing both approaches? **Does having more cores make one implementation more efficient than the other one?**

## Framework
* Both applications will be tested in the same cloud VMs running _Ubuntu 21.10 (GNU/Linux 5.13.0-30-generic x86_64)_ with **1 vCPU, 2vCPU and 4vCPU**. 
* To measure the difference in CPU load both applications will establish a listening port and subsequently accept a given number of clients that will attempt to communicate with the server concurrently (different numbers of concurrent clients will therefore correspond to different loads).
* The overall CPU load of the system will be measured over a given amount of time after all clients have established a connection with the server.

## Profiling with top
As described in Reference #2: 

```bash
top -b -n 10 -d 1 -u papayachat >> <TEXT_OUTPUT_FILE>
	-b : Batch mode (output goes to stdout)
	-d : Delay between captures (in seconds)
	-n : Total number of captures
	-u : Show only processes being run by a particular user 
```

Further exploration of the functionality of top should be made regarding the `-S` flag, to should the cumulative time of the processes (see man page).

Taken from the manpage:

```
38. TIME  --  CPU Time
	Total  CPU time the task has used since it started.  When Cumulative mode 
	is On, each process is listed with the cpu time that it and its dead 
	children have used.  You toggle Cumulative mode with `S', which is both a 
	command-line option and an interactive command.  See the `S' interactive 
	command for  additional	information regarding this mode.

39. TIME+  --  CPU Time, hundredths
	The same as TIME, but reflecting more granularity through hundredths of a 
	second.
```

Meaning of abbreviations:

```
%CPU  --  CPU Usage
	The task's share of the elapsed CPU time since the last screen update, 
	expressed as a percentage of total CPU time.

%Cpu(s):  0.0 us,  0.0 sy,  0.0 ni,  100.0 id,  0.0 wa,  0.0 hi,  0.0 si,  0.0 st
```

```
us, user    : time running un-niced user processes
sy, system  : time running kernel processes
ni, nice    : time running niced user processes
id, idle    : time spent in the kernel idle handler
wa, IO-wait : time waiting for I/O completion
hi : time spent servicing hardware interrupts
si : time spent servicing software interrupts
st : time stolen from this vm by the hypervisor
```

### First test
0. If running in Ubuntu, stop `ufw` before starting the test:
```bash
service ufw stop
```
1. On server (profiler), run `nc` listening on a port:
```bash
nc -l -k <PORT>
``` 
And subsequently (in another window, or run `nc` in the background in the same 
window), run `top` to measure the CPU load:

```bash
Linux: 
top -b -n 20 -d 1 >> <FILE_OUTPUT> 

FreeBSD 
top -s 0.5 -b -d <#_of_FRAMES> >> <FILE_OUTPUT>

-s: Time between screen captures (can also be fractional)
```

2. On client (load generator), run `tcpkali` to send a message to the server:
```bash
tcpkali --message "<MESSAGE_STRING>" <IP_PROFILER>:<PORT>
```

3. Filter the data generated by `top` to only see the data generated by `nc`:
```bash
cat <FILE_OUTPUT> | grep " nc$" | less
```

### References
1. [getrusage(2)](https://man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/getrusage.2.html): Use the syscall getrusage(2) in a C program to measure the amount of time spent executing in both user and kernel mode for either the program itself or its children.
2. [Efficient way to calculate CPU usage of multiple processes in Linux (stackoverflow)](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/34103971/efficient-way-to-calculate-cpu-usage-of-multiple-processes-in-linux)
